This is an interview with John Ragland, Sr. by Mark
McCall on April 29, 1993 at Westminster
Presbyterian Church concerning the
perspectives of the Civil Rights Movement during
the 1960s. In the interest of accumulating
knowledge, I'm asking you to donate this tape to me
or to the Texas A&M Oral History Collection at the
University Archives. Is that all right with you?
Yes, it is.
What is your current job and profession? I am a
senior minister at Westminster Presbyterian
Church in Bryan, Texas. And where were you born? I
was born in Jacksonville, Florida. Do you want to
know the date? Sure. That doesn't bother me. It was
April 6, 1947. And where did you grow up? I grew up in
the southeast. major cities in the southeast.
Jacksonville, Florida, Daytona, Pensacola,
Savannah, Atlanta, Georgia, Charlotte, North
Carolina, Birmingham, Alabama, Jackson,
Mississippi. When were you in high school? I was in
high school from about 1961 to 1965. How did you
perceive the situations in America toward
minorities? Well, I was in high school in Atlanta,
Georgia. And I lived in Atlanta two different
times. I lived in Atlanta in the mid-50s when I was
probably in the fourth grade. And then we came back
in the early 60s when
I was in the 10th grade. And so I guess it wasn't 61 or
65. I guess it was really 62 to 65 is when I was really
Well, 61, 65, anyway, something like that.
Because I was there when Sean Kennedy was
assassinated. When was that? Was that in 61 or 62?
Right in there. Right, right. Well, I do remember
in the mid-50s, I could go into the richest
apartment store in downtown Atlanta. And I was
getting ready to go in. Went down to the basement. I
was going to go to the bathroom. And I really wasn't
paying attention to what I was doing. And I started
walking into this bathroom, and this policeman
stopped me. And he said, you can't go in that
bathroom. That bathroom is for, I guess he said,
Negroes. And you need to go to this bathroom,
because this is for whites. And I can also remember
that there, in the bus station, there was a section
for black people and there was a section for white
people. I think in the high school years, I don't
have any real recollections of any of that, one way
or the other. It's just not in my mind. And our high
school was not integrating any sense of the word
when I was in high school. Why did you decide to go
into the ministry? Well, I was headed for really a
military career. I had enjoyed the ROTC program in
high school immensely, and I thought I would
really enjoy a military career. And then I became a
Christian, came to know Christ as my personal
Savior and Lord about the summer before my senior
year. God began to change some of my motivations
and really began to put within me a desire to pursue
a full-time Christian vocational work such as
ministry. I started moving in that direction.
Where'd you go? Where'd you attend college,
seminary? I went to Belhaven College, which is a
four-year liberal arts college related to the
Presbyterian Church. At that time, it was related
to the Presbyterian Church in the United States,
which was the old Southern Presbyterian Church.
And then I went to seminary, Reformed Theological
Seminary, also in Jackson, Mississippi. During
what years? Okay, I was at Belle Haven from 1965 to
1969, and I performed seminary from 1969 until
1973, and I took a year out and served the church in
Prattville,
Alabama. Okay, can you describe Belle Haven
during the 60s? What was it? Just some... Oral
descriptions, I guess, of the school? Okay, well,
Belhaven was not, there were no black students in
Belhaven College until my senior year. And at that
time, I think we had one student. She ended up, I
think she ended up graduating. She must have
transferred
in. There, the college was a small school. And I
think the college somewhat reflected the
conflict over race relations,
attitudes toward race relations in society in
general. What I'm meaning by that is you had some
people that really didn't agree with a prejudiced
attitude toward black people whatsoever. Some
were from missionary families, either from
Africa or from Brazil. And they just didn't
compute in their thinking to have that kind of
attitude toward black people. Then you had some
other people that were, that was what they were
brought up with. That was their cultural
perspective. So there was somewhat of a conflict
during that, from about 1965 all the way to 69. In
Belle Haven I remember that there were somewhat of
a somewhat of a tension there among some of the
students. And Belhaven itself went through a
transition as they moved from a, I think they
adopted a policy, debated it extensively, but
they finally, I think the board adopted basically
a policy of not discriminating on the basis of race
or color. I think part of that was in with the
getting federal money. And then there were some
that didn't even want to be getting federal money.
It didn't really have anything to do with the race
at all. It was just a philosophy of receiving
federal funds. So some of that debate was quite
mixed. But some of it did deal with the issue of
integration. Where did most of the students come
from? I think most of the students really came from
the South. Was it a close campus between the
student to student? Oh, yeah. It was a very small
campus. And between the faculty and the students?
Yes, close relationship between faculty and
students. Very good faculty-student ratio.
Remember you telling how the faculty used to come
or want some, there was a couple of guys that used to
come around before finals. They kind of breezed in
to kind of give a word of encouragement, which is
really appreciated. That was in the Bible
department primarily. I think they really had a
pastoral concern for students.
And was it co-ed at the time? Yep, it was co-ed. We
already touched on this a little bit, but were
there any black students? Not until my senior
year.
How did you feel about the black students or what
you really, but black race during your freshman
year?
Well, I don't know. I think I was going through
something of a transition. I think my freshman
year, it was either my freshman year or my
sophomore year, I sensed that it was my freshman
year. There was a fellow there that was from
Alabama. I don't want to mention his name, but he
was from Alabama. He was a Christian student. And
we had in Jackson at that time a showing of the Billy
Graham film, which was called The Restless Ones.
And it was shown at the Mississippi State
Coliseum. That's where they have the state fair.
And this young man, with all the innocence in the
world, with a genuine concern to reach out, he
invited a black girl to go with him to this Billy
Graham crusade. And his interest was
that he
really wanted to hear what was going on. Or if she
was already Christian, he wanted her to find out
about the film. He took her. And I can remember
that, and this is all tied in with your question, so
don't worry about it. I haven't forgotten your
question. But this student went ahead and took her
on to that
film, and then
later that afternoon, I think it was after dinner,
and it was, you know, the afternoon. It's daylight
for longer than usual. We had, I think, kind of a
devotions of some sort out on the steps of one of the
buildings there. And right in the middle of that,
someone came up and announced that a bunch of the
basketball players were after this student from
Alabama. And so a couple of guys took off to go find
out what was going on. And then I kind of got some of
the information. And what we found out was that
these basketball players, a number of them from
Mississippi, a number of them from Louisiana,
were outraged, this guy would take a black group to
this Billy Graham. And they were out to beat him up
for doing it. And so these other guys took off to go
try to protect him. So I took off to go find out what
in the world was going on. And I remember we were up
on the third floor of Wells Hall, as it was called.
It was grim, because I was on one end of it, and all
the basketball players were on the other end,
standing outside of this young man's locked dorm
door. He was inside, hiding for his life. And these
guys were outside, and they were ready to take him
apart. And about that time, the coach came over
there, and he kind of cleared him out of it. He
wasn't very happy with it. with her attitude, but
neither was he very happy with what that student
did, because he was from Louisiana, and reflected
some of those very attitudes himself, and was
himself in no way at that time had come to know
Christ in his life, and basically was being
dominated by a sinful and self-centered godless
perspective. Now for myself, I think something of
my pilgrimage in working through race
relationships,
I think I had been working through some things. I
think the early civil rights movement and all this
discussion about race relations had prompted me,
since I've been a Christian, to be thinking
through my own attitude. In fact, I remember when I
was very young, and lived in Atlanta, that I was, I
remember saying, yes sir, to a black man, and I was
reprimanded for doing that. You don't do that. You
don't say, ma'am, or sir, to a black man. And so, I
myself was a product of southern, a certain aspect
of old south culture. But I was, I had become a
Christian. And so I had, that So I began to think
through, as a Christian, what should my attitude
be toward black people and race relationships?
And I can remember specifically sitting down and
reading in the first chapter, no, second chapter
of James, where James is rebuking the
discriminatory attitude that had grown up among
some of the Christians that he was writing to
concerning the rich and poor where they bring the
rich in and put them up at the front and they sit the
poor back and then James said that's a wrong
attitude that you have because he goes on to say God
is not a respecter of persons and when I read that I
was convicted I said here's my answer here's what
my attitude is toward people toward black people
toward people that are not like me they're the
image of God, and I need to relate to them in a loving
way, and relate to them as I would want to be related
to, and so forth and so on. And I really think that
the grace of God in my heart, plus the wisdom of God
according to the Scripture and His directions for
my life, worked in me to begin to make some changes
in my evidence. So I think by the time that happened
to that young man from Alabama, my attitudes were
already beginning to change. And that was toward,
it would have been in the spring, probably
freshman
year. Just kind of aside, are the basketball
players, were they recruited? Or were they just
taken from the student population? They were
recruited. And how much... Was it a strict
Christian school?
What was the ratio? I don't really want to put a
ratio on it, but it's a liberal arts college. What
was associated with the church? What you're
really asking is how Christian was this Christian
college? And I would have to say that it was, while
everybody on the faculty was required to make some
kind of Christian assent, it was certainly
debatable whether we were dealing with
evangelical Christians, and what I mean by
evangelical Christian is a person that believes
that Christ's death on the cross was a vicarious
atonement, a substitutionary atonement, was
paying for the sins of sinners, and that through
faith along with Christ we are forgiven for our
sins, and believe in the scriptures being
inerrant in its original communication, and then
protected in its scripturation. and protected in
its transmission,
not everyone on the faculty would have fit that
description. And certainly not everybody in the
student body fit that description. We had some
students who came from Christian homes who were
the most rebellious people you'd ever seen in your
life because they didn't want to be there, the
music didn't need to be there, and they weren't
happy about it at all. So, and then you had some
people that were genuine laborers and you had some
faculty who were genuine laborers. So, how many, I
guess, you kind of split up in like cliques or
whatever, groups, and how many people overall
would you say the enrollment was about? About 600.
About 600. About how many general groups, I guess,
or how many general conflicts probably were there
as far as, like you have your Christians on one side
or your Evangelicals, and then was there a wide
spectrum of varying opinions? Well, you had
different groups. Your largest group, religious
group, was probably called Westminster
Fellowship, and that was predominantly a
Presbyterian group. kind of fellowship that we'd
meet in a large group meeting on a Thursday night
and we'd fill up the science lecture hall and
probably have anywhere from 100 to maybe 150
packed in there and have a good meeting. Then you
had some Methodist and some Baptist and some
Lutherans. And then you had a number of students
who really didn't make any noise about being
Christians. But I would have to say it was
predominantly Christians with a minority of
non-Christians as far as the student body was
concerned. Were there any incidents or
demonstrations while you were at Belhaven?
outside of like in the community, involved in the
community? No, not in the big city of Jackson. Of
course, I think it was during that period of time
that Martin Luther King was assassinated and
there were the riots all over the country. I just
don't really remember when those three civil
rights workers were killed in Philadelphia,
Mississippi. by those plane folks.
I can't remember when that was before I came to
Belle Haven. It seems like it was a while
ago. Was there a lot of... Was there a lot of civil
unrest for Lillian Jackson as a whole? I don't
really remember a lot of it. How did the views on
campus change when you were there? Well, it's
interesting. I think that there was growth in
understanding the implications of the scripture
for race relationships. The Presbyterian Church
in Mississippi itself was working through those
very issues. And you have, it's very interesting,
you had liberals, and when I say liberal, that
would be somebody that would reject the Bible as
really being divinely inspired without error
from beginning to end. And someone that would
reject miracles of Christ or explain them in a
naturalistic sort of way. But primarily it would
be a rejection of Scripture as being divinely
inspired. inspired without AR from beginning to
end in the original manuscripts. I would define
that person as liberal. And there were those
liberals in the Southern Presbyterian Church in
Mississippi. And they were very social action
oriented. Their gospel was what we call a social
gospel. They talked in terms of of redeeming
society and redeeming the
institutions of society. And so the Civil Rights
Movement was a big thing for them. I mean, that was
where it's at. Down in Mississippi, man, they were
going to integrate all the churches, and
integration's what we're going to have to do. So
that was kind of it. banner which they marched
under. Then you had other, what, then you had
other, you had primarily lay people in
Mississippi that were in the Southern
Presbyterian Church who resisted that
tremendously. And many of these were, quote,
conservatives. And I'm going to say they were
conservative in the sense that they were
politically conservative. And conservative in
the sense that they wanted to conserve certainly
the cultural position that they were taking when
it came to the matter of segregation and
integration. And they were also religiously
conservative in the sense that they accepted
historic biblical Christianity and the teaching
about Christ and His work as Savior, and they
accepted the Bible as the Word of God in the fullest
sense of the word.
But not all of them had a genuine living faith
relationship to Christ. It was more cultural than
it was real, although there were some that it was
very real in. And then you had ministers who were
definitely conservative, but who understood the
implications of scripture for race relations.
And they recognized the segregation and
prejudice toward black people because they're
black was really an expression of sin. And so they
were... They were in an interesting position. And
they were having to be sensitive to the people that
needed to be led. At the same time, they needed to be
sensitive to the wrong foundation that the
liberal ministers were operating with. And so
they had a delicate road to walk during the 60s in
Mississippi as they sought to lead the church and
to lead these conservative lay people into really
embracing a biblical position in obedience to
Christ and to really move forward. And they made
some strides. They made some strides in that. And
some of those men were in the Bible department, but
they didn't come. And so they also had some impact
and influence on the student body in their own
perspectives about this. So the strides that have
been made in the church in Mississippi when it
comes to race relations, where it's been among the
conservative Presbyterian church, the
ministers have led the way.
During this time, it would have been possible to
say Martin Luther King or another prominent black
activist would have been welcome to give the
commencement speech. Absolutely not. He would
not have been welcome. Now, with Martin Luther
King, it's interesting. You've got a... I
remember the Selma March. And I remember my
attitude toward that was extremely negative. And
the sit-ins and all the things that they did and the
bus-ins that they did, they're very negative
attitude toward us. And it's negative because of
the so-called civil disobedience. And civil
disobedience is not civil. It's disobedience.
It's breaking the law. And that's not to say that
the laws are just. I think they were unjust laws. I
don't think there's any question of that. But at
the same time, I don't think two wrongs make a
right. And the
disdain for law that was represented in that
movement, I really didn't appreciate. And still
don't appreciate. But I do think that God used
that, and he brought about some changes which are
really good changes in one sense of the word. But
you see, the problem with the Civil Rights
Movement is, and I think we're seeing this in the
90s, that the Civil Rights Movement dealt with
externals, but was unable to address the
internals. And that's the changing of people's
attitudes. You've got people who have
begrudgingly accepted non-discrimination in
terms of outward behavior, while inside their
hearts the same old discrimination lives on. And I
really believe it takes the teaching of the
Scripture and the grace of God in Christ to begin to
make those kind of changes in hearts. And those
kind of changes in the heart that have been made,
there have been perverts in Mississippi. They've
got a long ways to go. But there has been some change
in heart attitudes, and it has come through the
gospel. It hasn't come through legislation and
those changes. Although I think, while I don't
appreciate it, in the sense that I think that was
the right thing to do, I think today, 25, 30 years
later, I have a much better appreciation of where
they were coming from, the frustration they felt,
the sense of injustice that they felt. And
certainly, to be treated as second-class people
and to be treated as non-people, it does insult
everyone's humanity. And I can appreciate and
understand where they were coming from, though I
don't appreciate the math that they were working
with to try to make the changes they made. To get
back to your original question about the, we would
have, quote, liberal speakers come and speak at
chapel. I remember William Winter who came and
spoke in chapel. William Winter was at one time
governor of Mississippi. He was more of a moderate
to liberal governor, politically speaking. He
came and spoke. I think at one time he may have even
been on the board of Bellarmine College because he
was a Presbyterian. He represented more of that
liberal wing of the Presbyterian church in
Mississippi. He came and spoke and so forth. But I
think much beyond that, to have, back when I was
there, to have a plaque to come and speak would have
been, in a circumstance like Martin Luther King,
would not have been appreciated.
What was taught at Bill Haven concerning black
citizens? You know, as well as far as in class, you
know, maybe just... Well, there certainly was not
racism when the issues were addressed. And in
fact, I remember I did a... a paper on race
relations
for one of my Bible classes. And I remember the
title of my paper was Race Relations, Not a Black or
White Issue. And I remember the professor saying
that was a very cool pun in the title. But my
impression is that as far as instruction was
concerned, that we had men, and primarily where
this was coming from, of course the Mount Major was
bombed, so I really can't speak for the other
departments, but I would say that the Bible
department, when we would touch on these issues,
they were really moving us toward a God
would
put out a biblical perspective recognizing the
image-bearing nature of all of us and the need for
us to deal with them as we would discriminate
against them because they're different. Q This
gets in a little bit about seminary a little bit
later, but even while you were at Westminster, how
was a prospective minister? Was there a set way? A
When I was at Belhaven? Q Well, at Belhaven, and
also when you were at the seminary. A Reform
seminary? Q Right. How was your training here to
become a minister? How were you? Was there any
certain way that you were supposed to view it, or
was it really a personal matter?
Well, I don't know that that was, you know, there
was an over, we didn't have any classes on race
relationships or anything like that. We didn't
have any classes on multiculturalism and
so-called desensitizing you to this and that kind
of stuff we're getting now in the 90s in which we're
having to address the very real problem that
changing legislation does not change human
hearts and we're now finding this out but the I do
remember as I was in seminary
that I should mention this let me mention this this
would fold into this in my between my
my My senior year in college and my seminary, after
I graduated from college, I worked at Briarwood
Presbyterian Church, and I'd also worked there
the summer before.
Briarwood is in Birmingham, Alabama. It's an
evangelical church. It was a southern
Presbyterian church back in 68, 69, later came
into the PCA, helped to form the PCA, Presbyterian
Church of America. And it was a conservative
church, and one of those churches where they were
really seeking to follow the scripture, and
really seeking to follow the scripture when the
race was launched. And they began a program called
Operation, it was called Camp New Face. in which
there was a concerted effort to minister to
inner-city black children and to take them out at
the expense of Rarwoos Christian Church to a camp.
It was a Presbytery camp. Presbytery is our way
of... It's kind of like a Baptist... association.
It's an association, a connected association of
Presbyterian churches in given areas called
Presbyterian. And Presbyterian Birmingham had a
camp. And Briarwood was a member of that
Presbyterian. So we used that camp, the
Birmingham Presbyterian camp. And we took some
black kids out there
to that camp.
And these were, we had little kids, and I worked
with that camp. Man, it was a tremendous
experience. Just a tremendous experience. I
remember that was back when Hubert Humphrey was
running against Richard Nixon. And we had a black
camp director. I remember getting into a little
discussion with him, and he was a hunter
supporter, and I was in things as a supporter. We
were talking about who could really help out the
black people the most. It was really a very
enlightening, great time in my life. I made some
great friends. I had some black parents who were
really wonderful experiences. But once again, we
see it is the Episcopal Church that was really
leading there in ministry, not just the outward
conduct, but really seeking the ministry of the
Father. So I think there was a growing conviction
in me that... that a segregationist attitude
comes to the church, an attitude of, we won't let
black people come and worship in our churches, one
that I couldn't tolerate to the point that I
remember when I graduated as a senior and was
looking at churches, that one of my questions that
I would ask was, what is your attitude toward black
people in this church? So
whatever was contributing to that, there were a
lot of things contributing to that. Running the
board is working my life and just lots of things.
But it wasn't a case of seminary, you know,
sitting in a stand and saying, here's the attitude
you want me to take. How are... In the early 60s,
there was a book written by a black like me, by John
Howard Griffin, where he went through, traveled
through the South, and appeared as both a black
person and as a white person. And later on in the
experiment, he would go through town as a black
person to be treated one way by the black people,
and then go back through as a white person. and the
black people would just disdain and everything
and wouldn't have anything to do with it. How were
the black attitudes, the black children,
counselors, and other people? You know, that was
really interesting. That's a good question. My
experience with that was that the high school guys
were woke. I took an authoritarian approach to my
discipline with them. In the cabin, for example,
I'd say, okay, let's get your beds made. They
wouldn't be doing it. I'd say, okay, I want you all
to go. I want you to get down and do ten push-ups. And
that guy just fell on the bed and was laughing at me.
I said, whoa, what are we going to do here? There was
no respect or authority whatsoever. In fact, I
remember in that camp, the camp broke out into a
great big fight. And I was very thankful that we
had... a wrestler on staff that was from the
University of Michigan. And he was a big old guy,
and he just waded into the group and grabbed about
five of them and pulled them out. And, well, I was
glad to see him around. But that's kind of a scary
thing. But with the little kids, the kids, you
know, like maybe middler age, maybe 5th grade, 6th
grade, 4th, 5th, 6th, all they would do. And God
has really done some tremendous work in their
mind. Father was there. And it was a tremendous
time, just a tremendous time. A number of kids
really came to know the Savior and had experience.
So that's the way I see it. The older they got,
they seemed to get more burdened, more of a, which I
guess would be true with white kids. You need kids,
I mean all sorts of kids. That's just kind of the way
it is across the board. Does that kind of get you to
your question? How many on staff there, how many
counselors were funded in Cape Town? Now when you
say that. At Bellhaven? Well, Bellhaven and Camp.
Camp New Face? Yeah. Oh, I think all of them. Okay.
Unless it was the... No, I think they're all from
this town. How about Bellhaven? Are there any
students from up north? Very.
Were the students... During this time, there's
also a big campus... you know, students' free
speech movement on campuses across America and
Berkeley, California and everything is going on.
How was that treated at Belhaven? Well, it kind of
emerged a little bit at Belhaven. You know, I was in
the middle of Vietnam as well and I remember our I
think it was the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution. I think
our Student Government Association, SGA, voted a
resolution disapproving of the Gulf of Tonkin
Resolution. And I think that there was unrest with
respect to the administration. I remember the
closest thing we ever got to a riot on campus. All
the students gathered into the into the
cafeteria, and we were really upset about some
things. I don't remember exactly what it was, but I
remember the president, Howard J. Cleveland, at
the time, he came in and addressed everybody. But
there was something of an angry spirit, kind of an
angry atmosphere.
Were you all fairly free to discuss The Civil
Rights Movement? Oh, sure.
On to a little bit about PCA, history of PCA a little
bit. What was the doctrine of the church? Was there
an official? The church really didn't take any
kind of official position on this question. The
old Southern Presbyterian Church did adopt a
change in their book church order which
specifically says that churches will not
discriminate on race or color when it comes to
membership in the church and in the when the pca was
in 1973 there were Some of the churches that helped
form the BCNA were segregationist churches. They
were churches
that...
So you had some churches that were segregationist
churches. In fact, maybe even some churches that
had policies people
being allowed to come into their churches. And of
course, we had Trinity Presbyterian Church that
was in Montgomery, Alabama. That was a very famous
church. The Supreme Court Justice, Chief Justice
of the Supreme Court of Alabama was a member of that
congregation. And I think it was back in the 1960s
that the pastor then, who was Robert Strong, stood
out in front of the church with all the news there
and all the cameras and black people coming up and
making a point there in Montgomery about this
segregationist church. And the pastor
graciously
saying, you will not be permitted to come worship
here. That church came into the PCA. In fact, that
church was one of the founding churches of the PCA.
Then you got Briarwood. You got Briarwood taking a
very different perspective on it. Briarwood was
receiving black members and blacks into
membership and leading a different approach
there. you've got i would say in the dca day
probably you've got pockets pockets
very small very much where you would have these
would be old old established churches in some
parts of the south that still holding on to some
remnants, although I don't know of any churches
that have any kind of official policies about
closed-door policies. I think maybe all of those
are gone. But there may still be some attitudes, a
hardening of the attitude that is still hanging
on. So I would say that the overwhelming, the
overwhelming Your
position certainly reflects my position.
Like here at Westminster, I mean, it's not even an
issue. I mean, we have black, we have Indian, we
have Korean, we have, you know, we're here to
minister to all the people in this town. and
we're we're out here reaching wherever the lord
gives us an opportunity to reach i think the gospel
has made that possible the gospel I think the ease
with which we deal with this is because we are a
diverse congregation. We don't necessarily
reflect a predominantly Old South cultural
perspective, although I think there is certainly
a number of people in the Old South that are members
of the congregation. I think that has helped make
that easier to deal
with. I think in, you know, there, like in
Briarwood, There were some things they had to work
through, some tensions they had to work through,
but they had to work them through very
successfully. So, you know, as far as the PCA is
concerned, we are far less of a segregationist
kind of group in 1993
than we were in 1970. When was the PCA formed? 1973.
And it was formed primarily by churches that came
out of the old southern Presbyterian church. You
had a mixture there. You had some, in memory I was
talking about, you had those conservatives who
were in Mississippi that were segregationist
oriented and then you had And then you had
conservatives who were saying, no, we need to...
That's really not consistent with the scriptural
approach. And I think you had some of that mixture
that came into the piece of that. Although I think
the dominant... the dominant position would have
been those conservatives that would say
segregation needs to go. It's not scriptural.
Were there any... Was it... Primarily the
southern churches? Primarily southern
churches. Were there any northern churches? In
about 1983, the Reformed
Presbyterian Church, which is primarily
northern,
united with the PCM. So we're much more of a
national church than we were.
How would you say that the... Overall, the events,
the civil rights movement and everything going
on, how did that affect your education? Is there
anything else?
Well, I think,
I would say that it
didn't affect my education. because I got out of
public school before all the upheaval of
integrating all those schools came in, which had
a, I think, from a pedagogical point of view, a
devastating effect on the education of blacks
and whites. I think trying to mix social
engineering in with pedagogy was disastrous.
There should have been. The busing, the whole
busing thing, it was terribly chaotic, terribly
chaotic. So how would you, How would you have fixed
it, so to say? Well, how would I have fixed it?
That's a really good question.
I think I might have been more gradual than
revolutionary. I think I might have wanted to
start at the lowest grades and face it. I would... I
would have wanted to bring in the influence of the
church, and here particularly I would think the
conservative church that is preaching the
gospel, but also is really preaching a biblical
view of the relations of the races. And have sought
to bring them in as allies to help them work with
adults, to work with parents, to help them work
through these issues. and i would have i wanted the
court's mandate and basically ramming
down people's throats and i think that that the
evolutionary approach would have i think been
more effective rather than revolutionary, which
I think would have been more effective for public
education, for the quality of public education.
And I think it would have been more effective in
dealing with the basic attitudes that people
have, prejudices and so forth. And we would be
where we are in 1993, I think, which is, We've got
real problems in public education. And we've
still got real problems in race relations. So we
had a revolution. But the revolution, as I think
revolutions frequently do, while there was a lot
of change, there was a lot of chaos. And there's a
lot of destruction. uh remnant of destruction
that we're still
trying to recover from
um in and looking back again over the years is there
anything that you regret doing